docs/example.rst, before:

Code Examples
=============

This file contains a number of examples of code to show many of the features
documented here.

Basic IOC
---------

This section describes the minimum code required to build an IOC using this
framework.  The source tree is:

======================= ========================================================
File/Directory          Description
======================= ========================================================
Db
Db/Makefile             Needs rules for building ``.db`` from ``.py``
Db/basic_ioc.py         Minimal example building a simple database
src
src/Makefile
src/main.c              Minimal IOC implementation
st.cmd                  Startup script for IOC initialisation
Makefile
configure               Standard EPICS ``configure`` directory, as generated
                        by ``makeBaseApp.pl``.
configure/CONFIG
configure/CONFIG_APP
configure/CONFIG_SITE   Must specify ``PYTHON`` and ``IOCBUILDER``
configure/Makefile
configure/RELEASE       Must specify ``EPICS_DEVICE``
configure/RULES
configure/RULES.ioc
configure/RULES_DIRS
configure/RULES_TOP
======================= ========================================================

The ``EPICS_DEVICE`` support module must be defined as usual, and the build also
needs the symbols ``PYTHON`` and ``IOCBUILDER`` to be specified.


Defining the Database
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The database defined here is utterly minimal, consisting of a single PV with a 1
second scan which returns the current timestamp in seconds.  The EPICS Device
definition to build the database record entry is the following Python line::

    aIn('TSEC', DESC = 'Timestamp in seconds', SCAN = '1 second')

This line defines an ``ai`` record named ``TEST`` with the specified scan
interval and description.

Alas quite a bit of boilerplate is needed to set things up, to load the
libraries and write out the result, and so for this minimal example the actual
code is somewhat longer:

..  literalinclude:: ../examples/basic_ioc/Db/basic_ioc.py
    :language: python
    :linenos:

The first 17 lines are needed to pick up the iocbuilder, configure it to build
template files, and to load the EPICS Device builder definitions.  The last line
writes out the generated database.

Some support is also needed from the make file, which again contains quite bit
of boilerplate:

..  literalinclude:: ../examples/basic_ioc/Db/Makefile
    :language: make
    :linenos:

The important point here is that the ``.db`` file is generated from the
corresponding ``.py`` file.

The result of this is the following file in ``db/basic_ioc.db``:

..  code-block:: none
    :linenos:

    record(ai, "$(DEVICE):TSEC")
    {
        field(DESC, "Timestamp in seconds")
        field(DTYP, "epics_device")
        field(INP,  "@TSEC")
        field(MDEL, "-1")
        field(SCAN, "1 second")
    }


Implementing the IOC
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

As this IOC does almost nothing its C implementation is pretty small:

..  literalinclude:: ../examples/basic_ioc/src/main.c
    :language: c
    :linenos:

First a minimal set of headers.  Both ``stdbool.h`` and ``unistd.h`` are
required as a consequence of using ``error.h``, and our implementation will use
``time.h``.  We need ``iocsh.h`` in order to call :func:`iocsh`.

Then the EPICS Device headers are standard.

The function ``read_timestamp`` actually implements the IOC functionality.  In
this case when the corresponding record is processed we compute a value which is
then used to update the PV.

The :func:`PUBLISH_READER` call binds our PV implementation to its definition in
the database, and we've chosen the appropriate implementation.

Finally IOC initialisation consists of a stereotyped sequence.
:func:`initialise_epics_device` must be called early, then records can be
published, then the IOC is started.  In this particular example we've put the
rest of the initialisation into an external startup script:

..  literalinclude:: ../examples/basic_ioc/st.cmd
    :language: c
    :linenos:

Note that it is possible perform complete IOC initialisation without a startup
script, and with a more complete IOC it can be more convenient to do this.


Database
--------

..  highlight:: py
    :linenothreshold: 1

This database declares three status PVs (``SE:CPU``, ``SE:ADCCLK``,
``SE:NTPSTAT``) together with a health aggregation PV::

    # A list of PVs we need to trigger and aggregate severity.
    system_alarm_pvs = [
        # CPU usage
        aIn('SE:CPU', 0, 100, '%', 1,
            DESC = 'CPU usage',
            HIGH = 80,      HSV  = 'MINOR',
            HIHI = 95,      HHSV = 'MAJOR'),

        boolIn('SE:ADCCLK', 'Clock Ok', 'Clock Dropout',
            ZSV  = 'NO_ALARM', OSV = 'MAJOR',
            DESC = 'ADC clock dropout detect'),

        # The following list must match the corresponding enum in sensors.c
        mbbIn('SE:NTPSTAT',
            ('Not monitored',   0,  'NO_ALARM'),    # Monitoring disabled
            ('No NTP server',   1,  'MAJOR'),       # Local NTP server not found
            ('Startup',         2,  'NO_ALARM'),    # No alarm during startup
            ('No Sync',         3,  'MINOR'),       # NTP server un-synchronised
            ('Synchronised',    4,  'NO_ALARM'),    # Synchronised
            DESC = 'Status of NTP server')]

    severity = AggregateSeverity(
        'SE:SYS:OK', 'System health', system_alarm_pvs)
    Trigger('SE', *trigger_pvs + [severity,])


PV Creation and Update
----------------------

..  highlight:: c
    :linenothreshold: 1

The code below publishes and updates the PVs published above::

    static struct epics_interlock *interlock;
    static double cpu_usage;
    static bool read_clock_dropout(void) { ... }
    static unsigned int NTP_status;

    static double update_cpu_usage(void) { ... }
    static unsigned int update_NTP_status(void) { ... }

    static void update_sensors(void)
    {
        interlock_wait(interlock);
        cpu_usage = update_cpu_usage();
        NTP_status = update_NTP_status();
        interlock_signal(interlock, NULL);
    }

    bool initialise_sensors(void)
    {
        interlock = create_interlock("SE", false);

        PUBLISH_READ_VAR(ai, "SE:CPU", cpu_usage);
        PUBLISH_READER(bi, "SE:ADCCLK", read_clock_dropout);
        PUBLISH_READ_VAR(mbbi, "SE:NTPSTAT", NTP_status);
    }

Commit message:

EPICS device: Switch to using epicsdbbuilder
Replace dependency on IOC builder with use of new epicsdbbuilder module.
This is simpler to use, to interface to, and to configure.

git-svn-id: svn+ssh://serv0002.cs.diamond.ac.uk/home/subversion/repos/controls/diamond/trunk/support/epics_device@128375 e099a375-04f9-0310-9d5f-a741eaff62e1

docs/example.rst, after:

Code Examples
=============

This file contains a number of examples of code to show many of the features
documented here.

Basic IOC
---------

This section describes the minimum code required to build an IOC using this
framework.  The source tree is:

======================= ========================================================
File/Directory          Description
======================= ========================================================
Db
Db/Makefile             Needs rules for building ``.db`` from ``.py``
Db/basic_ioc.py         Minimal example building a simple database
src
src/Makefile
src/main.c              Minimal IOC implementation
st.cmd                  Startup script for IOC initialisation
Makefile
configure               Standard EPICS ``configure`` directory, as generated
                        by ``makeBaseApp.pl``.
configure/CONFIG
configure/CONFIG_APP
configure/CONFIG_SITE   Must specify ``PYTHON``
configure/Makefile
configure/RELEASE       Must specify ``EPICS_DEVICE``
configure/RULES
configure/RULES.ioc
configure/RULES_DIRS
configure/RULES_TOP
======================= ========================================================

The ``EPICS_DEVICE`` support module must be defined as usual, and the build also
needs the symbols ``PYTHON`` and ``IOCBUILDER`` to be specified.


Defining the Database
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The database defined here is utterly minimal, consisting of a single PV with a 1
second scan which returns the current timestamp in seconds.  The EPICS Device
definition to build the database record entry is the following Python line::

    longIn('TSEC', DESC = 'Timestamp in seconds', SCAN = '1 second')

This line defines an ``longin`` record named ``TEST`` with the specified scan
interval and description.

A little bit of boilerplate is needed to set things up:

..  literalinclude:: ../examples/basic_ioc/Db/basic_ioc.py
    :language: python
    :linenos:

This code picks up the configured ``EPICS_DEVICE`` version (as configured in
``configure/RELEASE``) and configures the database to be generated with a
``$(DEVICE):`` prefix on each record name.  The last line writes out the
generated database.

Some support is also needed from the make file:

..  literalinclude:: ../examples/basic_ioc/Db/Makefile
    :language: make
    :linenos:

The important point here is that the ``.db`` file is generated from the
corresponding ``.py`` file and the ``EPICS_DEVICE`` symbol is exported to the
script above.

The result of this is the following file in ``db/basic_ioc.db``:

..  code-block:: none
    :linenos:

    record(longin, "$(DEVICE):TSEC")
    {
        field(DESC, "Timestamp in seconds")
        field(DTYP, "epics_device")
        field(INP,  "@TSEC")
        field(MDEL, "-1")
        field(SCAN, "1 second")
    }


Implementing the IOC
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

As this IOC does almost nothing its C implementation is pretty small:

..  literalinclude:: ../examples/basic_ioc/src/main.c
    :language: c
    :linenos:

First a minimal set of headers.  Both ``stdbool.h`` and ``unistd.h`` are
required as a consequence of using ``error.h``, and our implementation will use
``time.h``.  We need ``iocsh.h`` in order to call :func:`iocsh`.

Then the EPICS Device headers are standard.

The function ``read_timestamp`` actually implements the IOC functionality.  In
this case when the corresponding record is processed we compute a value which is
then used to update the PV.

The :func:`PUBLISH_READER` call binds our PV implementation to its definition in
the database, and we've chosen the appropriate implementation.

Finally IOC initialisation consists of a stereotyped sequence.
:func:`initialise_epics_device` must be called early, then records can be
published, then the IOC is started.  In this particular example we've put the
rest of the initialisation into an external startup script:

..  literalinclude:: ../examples/basic_ioc/st.cmd
    :language: c
    :linenos:

Note that it is possible perform complete IOC initialisation without a startup
script, and with a more complete IOC it can be more convenient to do this.


Database
--------

..  highlight:: py
    :linenothreshold: 1

This database declares three status PVs (``SE:CPU``, ``SE:ADCCLK``,
``SE:NTPSTAT``) together with a health aggregation PV::

    # A list of PVs we need to trigger and aggregate severity.
    system_alarm_pvs = [
        # CPU usage
        aIn('SE:CPU', 0, 100, '%', 1,
            DESC = 'CPU usage',
            HIGH = 80,      HSV  = 'MINOR',
            HIHI = 95,      HHSV = 'MAJOR'),

        boolIn('SE:ADCCLK', 'Clock Ok', 'Clock Dropout',
            ZSV  = 'NO_ALARM', OSV = 'MAJOR',
            DESC = 'ADC clock dropout detect'),

        # The following list must match the corresponding enum in sensors.c
        mbbIn('SE:NTPSTAT',
            ('Not monitored',   0,  'NO_ALARM'),    # Monitoring disabled
            ('No NTP server',   1,  'MAJOR'),       # Local NTP server not found
            ('Startup',         2,  'NO_ALARM'),    # No alarm during startup
            ('No Sync',         3,  'MINOR'),       # NTP server un-synchronised
            ('Synchronised',    4,  'NO_ALARM'),    # Synchronised
            DESC = 'Status of NTP server')]

    severity = AggregateSeverity(
        'SE:SYS:OK', 'System health', system_alarm_pvs)
    Trigger('SE', *trigger_pvs + [severity,])


PV Creation and Update
----------------------

..  highlight:: c
    :linenothreshold: 1

The code below publishes and updates the PVs published above::

    static struct epics_interlock *interlock;
    static double cpu_usage;
    static bool read_clock_dropout(void) { ... }
    static unsigned int NTP_status;

    static double update_cpu_usage(void) { ... }
    static unsigned int update_NTP_status(void) { ... }

    static void update_sensors(void)
    {
        interlock_wait(interlock);
        cpu_usage = update_cpu_usage();
        NTP_status = update_NTP_status();
        interlock_signal(interlock, NULL);
    }

    bool initialise_sensors(void)
    {
        interlock = create_interlock("SE", false);

        PUBLISH_READ_VAR(ai, "SE:CPU", cpu_usage);
        PUBLISH_READER(bi, "SE:ADCCLK", read_clock_dropout);
        PUBLISH_READ_VAR(mbbi, "SE:NTPSTAT", NTP_status);
    }
