docs/persistence.rst, before:

Support for Persistent PV State
===============================

This EPICS Device module provides a mechanism for persistent PV state which is
quite different from the mechanism provided by autosave/restore.  If
autosave/restore is used then this functionality can be ignored, and no PVs
should be marked as persistent internally.

The functionality described here is defined in the header file
``persistence.h``.

The mechanism here works by saving a single file containing the persistent state
of each PV marked for persistence.  Note that only ``epics_device`` PVs can be
marked as persistent, and the persistence marking is performed at the time the
PVs are published to the device by the IOC.

The following functions provide the persistence interface.

..  function:: bool load_persistent_state( \
        const char *file_name, bool check_parse, int save_interval)

    This should be called once after publishing all PVs to EPICS device but
    before calling :func:`iocInit`.  The given `file_name` will be loaded, if
    present, to determine initial values for all PVs marked for persistence.

    If `check_parse` is ``false`` then this function will return success even if
    there are parsing errors while loading the persistence file.

    After this point updates to PVs will be written back to the state file at
    the interval determined by `save_interval`, in seconds.

..  function:: bool update_persistent_state(void)

    This can be called to force the state file to be written if any persistent
    PVs have changed their state.  Returns ``false`` if an error occurs.

..  function:: void terminate_persistent_state(void)

    This can be called during IOC shutdown to force an orderly termination of
    the persistence state and ensure that the state file is up to date.

Commit message:

EPICS Device: Add IOC shell commands for two key commands
Also tweak the load_persistent_state() command.

git-svn-id: svn+ssh://serv0002.cs.diamond.ac.uk/home/subversion/repos/controls/diamond/trunk/support/epics_device@128380 e099a375-04f9-0310-9d5f-a741eaff62e1

docs/persistence.rst, after:

Support for Persistent PV State
===============================

This EPICS Device module provides a mechanism for persistent PV state which is
quite different from the mechanism provided by autosave/restore.  If
autosave/restore is used then this functionality can be ignored, and no PVs
should be marked as persistent internally.

The functionality described here is defined in the header file
``persistence.h``.

The mechanism here works by saving a single file containing the persistent state
of each PV marked for persistence.  Note that only ``epics_device`` PVs can be
marked as persistent, and the persistence marking is performed at the time the
PVs are published to the device by the IOC.

The following functions provide the persistence interface.

..  function:: bool load_persistent_state( \
        const char *file_name, int save_interval, bool check_parse)

    This should be called once after publishing all PVs to EPICS device but
    before calling :func:`iocInit`.  The given `file_name` will be loaded, if
    present, to determine initial values for all PVs marked for persistence.
    After this point updates to PVs will be written back to the state file at
    the interval determined by `save_interval`, in seconds.

    If `check_parse` is ``false`` then this function will return success even if
    there are parsing errors while loading the persistence file.

    This function can be called from the IOC shell, but in this case the return
    code is lost.

..  function:: bool update_persistent_state(void)

    This can be called to force the state file to be written if any persistent
    PVs have changed their state.  Returns ``false`` if an error occurs.

..  function:: void terminate_persistent_state(void)

    This can be called during IOC shutdown to force an orderly termination of
    the persistence state and ensure that the state file is up to date.
